From Hansel minutes.com it's Hansel
minutes or weekly discussion with
web developer and technologists. Scott
Hanselman hosted by Carl Franklin. This
is Lawrence Ryan announcing show number
45 recorded Wednesday, January 3rd, 2007. Support
for handsome limits is provided
by COVID Smith tools, makers
of code Smith and extensible.
Have the base code generator
for.net. Hanselman is listeners. Get
$100 off code Smith professional
with coupon code H M
100. online@covidsmithtools.com and buy slash
end software red carpet subscriptions.
The most comprehensive solution for
any connectivity to your.net and
asp.net application with components for
every major internet protocol online@wwwdotandsoftware.com.
Support is also provided by
dotnet developers journal. The world's
leading dotnet developer magazine online
at www dot  dot
com. In this episode, Scott
and Kroll discuss programming language
extensibility. Hi, this is Carl Franklin
and you're listening to Hansel
minutes from handsome and it's
dot com. I'm here with
Scott Hanselman. We're back from
a, from a long period
of hiatus. Scott you're in
Tanzania, weren't you? Yeah, I
was, I was in a
Russian Tanzania, just a couple
of hours West of Mount
Kilimanjaro. So what was, what
were you doing there? My
wife and I, my wife,
she was in Bob way.
We go to Africa every
year to visit family. We
usually go to Zimbabwe or
South Africa, but most my wife
Mo her sister in law
works at the Rwanda and
war crimes tribunal, which is
in Urrutia cause Rwanda is
just to the West of
Tanzania right next to Burundi.
So she works for the
war crimes tribunal for the
UN, and we want to
just go visit her. And
we ended up having kind
of a informal family reunion.
Moe is number four of
seven kids, and we ended
up getting quite a few
kids up there at the
same time. Wow. And this
is near a, the big
mountain Kilimanjaro, right? Yeah, it
is. We actually got a
chance to go to Kilimanjaro
as well, but we're not
really climber types. And since
we took Zanesville our 13
month old with us, which
was interesting on a 25
hour flight, by the way,
we just kinda went to
the base and looked around
at school. We were there
for a month. We hung
out for Christmas, learned Swahili
and generally had a good
time. I took my parents
to their first time anywhere.
First time out of the,
on a plane for some
out of the country. Well,
I think actually they went
to Mexico once, but I
don't think that counts. That's
just South San Diego. So
how do you say I'm
a VB programmer in Swahili?
I don't know. I don't
know. Need you foods talk
on you, new foods, new
taco. What would you, food's
a VB programmer. Wow. You
actually attempted that. I think
that means, I think that
means I want to learn
to be a BB programmer,
but it's it, you know,
I was only there a
month. Wow. It's still impressive.
So what are we talking
about today, Scott? Well, you
know, we wanted to get
back into the programming way
of doing things. And I
think that the programming shows
are the best. That's what
we're good at. We're programmers.
And I was looking at
this white paper that was
up kind of a throwaway
thing buried inside of the
announcement that Microsoft released support
for iron Python. You remember
a while back iron Python
was developed basically an implementation
of Python that would compile
too ill to intermediate language.
And they released iron Python
for asp.net. And we had
done that, that one show
on dynamic languages, right. And
then, you know, John Lamb, who's
at I unknown.com John Lamb, who
created a Ruby CLR, CLR.
Exactly. That's that bridge between
Ruby and the CLR. It's
kind of like calm interrupt
in the sense that actual
Ruby code, not, not Ruby
compiled to IRL, but actual
interpreted Ruby code could call.net
objects and talk to compile.net
objects as well as use
things like inline sharp. He's
moving to Redmond. Yeah. We
knew he went to go
join the firm, but I
didn't know he was moving.
That's pretty. Yeah. So he,
I actually, he emailed me
a couple of days ago
asking where he should bank.
Right. And you know, I'm
banker type. So he says,
where should I bank a
movement? Cause he's from Canada.
Yeah. So I said, you
know, bank at first technology
credit union, it's Microsoft credit
union, blah, blah, blah. And
then I started thinking about
this. He's going to move
to work on the CLR
team as a program manager.
And he, and he's all
about Ruby and he wouldn't
make a move like that
unless he was serious about
something. And you and I
had talked a little bit
in the dynamic language show
about that. Microsoft's clearly starting
to think about dynamic languages.
So I'm looking at this
release of iron Python and
there's this really great white
paper. I think you probably
have a link for it.
I, I sent you by
a guy named David Ebo.
It's buried in the middle
of the announcement. It's just
an asp.net/iron Python. And it's
a white paper on the
new dynamic language extensibility model
for asp.net. Now I love
the CLR team. I love
the.net framework team, but don't
you ever get the feeling
that the, the there's some
always cool innovation going on
in the asp.net team. Absolutely.
asp.net primarily pushes the.net framework.
Yeah. If they're doing something
crazy, I think about all
the different things that has
been in it has influenced
yup. Is so much
different from ISX. And
because of what the asp.net
team continues to do, you
know, Ajax when, when migrant,
you know, things, what kind
of, what they're doing in
the new version of outlook,
web access, you know, they
always have to come down
to the asp.net team and
see, well, what kind of
creative things can you come
up with? Yeah. So, you
know, asp.net and, and even
classic ASP before always supported
some kind of an extensibility
model, right? If you create
a language, if you make
Carl Lange as a, as
a third party vendor that
makes compilers, you know, you
could certainly use that for
asp.net. Right. Right. You'd go
into the page and you'd
say language equals whatever Carl
Lange, and you'll be able
to do that. But that's
assuming that your language would
actually compile into IRL at
compile time and, and be
a real assembly. But the,
the statically typed languages, statically,
compiled languages, rather like C
sharpening, there's more dynamic languages
like Python and like Ruby.
So they changed asp.net in
order to allow this extensibility
model and this, this white
paper, I thought it was
so interesting that I thought
we should kind of kind
of run through it. Right.
How did they change Change
ASP net for the next
version? Or is this a
service pack or what, how
is it going to change?
Well, it, it, it appears
that they've basically, they're using
this for an asp.net to
O and they've kind of,
they've kind of spot welded
into it. They basically hacking
into their own thing is
white papers, really interesting. It's
worth reading. It's only about
eight pages. Okay. And they
talk about, you know, some
of the techniques, they have
an asp.net that will go
over and what they did
to, to weld in, and
then where they saw that
there were weaknesses. And it's
pretty clear that the point
is is that this is
early, right. I'm gleaning here.
I don't know anything. No.
One's told me any secrets.
Right? I'm not saying anything
that's under NDA. I'm just
looking at stuff that you
can find on the net.
And I am speculating. So
I'm speculating that they're so
deeply interested in asp.net, that
they're kind of doing this
proof of concept to think
about what we could do
to make dynamic languages a
better experience under asp.net. Okay.
Now We had some discussions
and some feedback after the
dynamic languages show about early
binding, late binding dynamic, typing,
static, typing duct typing. We
will leave people to go
and listen to that show.
Again, some of the things
we got, right? Some of
the things we didn't. So
we're not going to talk
about whether we think dynamic
languages are, are better or
static. Typing is better. We're
just gonna kind of speak
about here's what's here's what's
happening. Okay. Sure. So iron
iron Python is an implementation
of Python for the CLR.
And it's really very good.
It's considered very good at
some of the Python conferences.
They did some tests cause
there's a standard test suite
when someone wants to implement
Python and it's very fast,
it's very fast. And a
lot of people like Python,
people say that Ruby feels
a lot like Python it's.
If you look at the
language boo, boo, that we've
talked about before, it feels
a little bit like Python
with a C sharp twist.
So, you know, Python's language
has been around for a
long time. That is very
comfortable to a lot of
people. And the idea that
someone might want to write
pages in Python is pretty,
pretty obvious. Certainly right now,
most people write their asp.net
pages in sharp. And we
usually call C-sharp first among
equals because there's, you know,
it's like, what is it?
70% C-sharp and 30% VB
don't like that. Do you
know what the numbers are
now? I don't know. It's
something like it's something like
that. I mean, VB is
a first class language and
C-sharp is just kind of
a little bit more first
class because every once in
a while something will be
released and they'll only support
C-sharp well, you know, You
don't want to give people
the wrong impression most of
the time it's because the
examples are in C sharp,
because what comes out of
Redmond is mostly from, comes
from C sharp developers, but
it all eventually gets VBI
sized. Right? Absolutely. Microsoft recognizes
that choice is important, you
know, and as much as
we say things like this
language and that language are
syntactic sugar, and they're just
different skins on the same
underlying thing, they each have
things that are kind of
unique to them, but it's
always just been those two
languages. So it appears that
Microsoft trying to work towards
more choice, which is always
a good thing, but it's
not just picking other languages
to do this work in,
but it's also languages that
are fundamentally different than what
people were expecting when they
design stuff. So let's talk
about kind of how the
existing asp.net model works, right?
So let's say that you
have an ASP X page,
right. That's sitting on the
file system and it's got
some, some code in, you
know, asp.net will parse that
page, that ASP X page,
and then look at all
of the different things that
exist within it. It might
have some declarative markup, like,
you know, the HTML body
tags, meta-tags things like that.
It may include some server
controls that it's going to
go have to get and
resolve. And then it may
have code snippets. Now a
lot of people put their
code in code behinds, but
there's still some value in
putting your code and code
snippets that are in line
in the ASB X page.
Right? So then asp.net, you
know, creates this, this code
Dom tree, right? The code
Dom is literally that it's
a document object model representing
code one time. We'll talk
about how you can use
the code down to generate
your own code. We use
this to make serializers the
XML sterilizer internal.net framework uses
the code Dom to represent
this. So asp.net is making
a language independent tree to
derive from system.web.page. And it's
going to describe the markup.
So it takes the declarative
markup and all the different
angle brackets, and then express
that in a, in a,
in a code dump, or
we're just translating declarative to
procedural. So if you go
and you say, angle bracket
B close bracket, hello, and
then close, be just some
literal text that eventually is
going to turn into a
response dot right call with
your texts expressed as a
string literal. So that's being
generated after the parsing. So
you get this tree that
represents this Dom, this is
not yet compiled. So then
asp.net will pick a code
Dom provider. There's one for
VB there's one for C
sharp. And based on that
language attribute that we talked
about, that language equals quote
VB or C-sharp that appears
in the page directive. And
then they're going to go
and say, Hey, provider generate
source code, given this code
Dom tree, we've described constructs
that are in basically L
in this, in this code
Dom, and we'll go and
generate that source code might
be in C sharp, might
be in VP. It depends
on what you're doing with
that page directive. And then
it goes, and it compiles
that into a DLL, you
know, a temporary DLL. You've
seen these in asp.net, and
it actually does that by
launching the compiler, right? You
can hit a page in
asp.net and actually see the
VB compiler, the C sharp
compiler firing off in the
background. Same thing happens when
you're doing XML sterilizers and
stuff like that. And then
of course the generated assembly
gets loaded and then gets
run, right. And all of
that code gen stuff only
happens once the very first
time you hit the page.
And that's why we always
have to hit asp.net pages
ahead of time, unless we've
done all the work ahead
of time, right. That's basically
how it works. And, you
know, in partial classes instead
of derivation and asp.net to,
Oh, but the general gist
is about like that. So
there is a thing and
asp.net that no one uses,
but the SharePoint team called
no compile pages. Okay. And
they literally just that their
pages that are totally driven
by data, they don't have
any compilation at all. They
don't get any code, right?
This is basically pages that
are static HTML and, and
server controls. But, you know,
the SharePoint team thought that
would be useful. And just
like I said, all the
different teams within Microsoft kind
of put pressure on the
asp.net team to innovate, do
different things. And it allowed
SharePoint to scale considerably when
there were times that you
didn't need to do compilation.
Okay. Okay. So this no
compile model exists. And basically
that just doesn't parsing builds
this tree and executes it.
And as long as the
page doesn't change, everything works
just fine. So they've got
these two different models for
asp.net pages, right? You've got
one that requires compilation statically
ahead of time. And you've
got one that doesn't require
compilation, but of course it's
no compile, so you don't
get any code. So what
these guys needed when they
wanted to do a dynamic
language was a model that
doesn't necessarily cause static compilation,
but still lets the page
have code. Cause once a
page gets compiled and turn
into a deal LNS, we
hadn't yet it doesn't exactly
get released. Right? I mean
these DLLs hang out for
a long time cause they
get compiled and they're real
DLLs in the temporary asp.net
files folder. And they sit
there and they don't really
go away until you shut
down and start over again.
So what they did was
apparently in an asp.net to,
Oh, there was a thing
called the page, parser filter
didn't know, I didn't know
this existed. This is apparently
a part of the very,
very beginning step when we
parsed the page and they
wanted what they changed to
make this work was this
parser. So this was an
entry point that existed that
had been previously untapped. Exactly.
You've nailed it. And it's
very early on in the
process. Yeah. And I don't
know if they'll do, they
may do another way. Right.
But this is part of
the no compile feature, but
this is a piece that
they basically said, Oh gosh,
you know, cause you imagine
them having this conversation, like
what exactly are we going
to hook into to make
this happen? And that was,
you know, that's a challenge.
So what they did was
they made a new page,
parser filter. So with the
no compile pages, you, you
go into your page directive
and you say, compilation mode
equals never. You can, you
know, with asp.net and with
most of.net, you can basically
plug in anything you want.
So in your web doc
and fig you go in
and you can say in
the, in the pages section,
right, you can go and
say page parser, filter type
and then put your own,
which is cool. You can
put your own page parts
or filter. You basically override
the existing one and do
whatever you want. So they
wrote one that customized the
parsing behavior and then actually
allowed code in these quote
unquote no compile pages. So
basically if the page uses
a dynamic language and in
this example, this proof of
concept that they're doing, it's
just iron Python. They will
make sure that the page
inherits from a custom based
class, cause they basically created
their own base class that
is going to allow this
stuff to happen. So they
hooked in two different places
here. And here's the cool
part. The, if the parser
right, finds a code snippet,
remembering that these are not
allowed in, in no compile
pages. Right? Right. No compile
pages only support markup or
server controls. So if the
parser finds a code snippet,
these are the little things
like angle bracket percent, you
know, it actually replaces the
snippet at parsing time with
a special control that holds
the code. I mean, that's
just, it's horrible, but it's
brilliant. Just drink it in.
Right. You got this model
don't allow code. We do
allow server controls. When you
see a code snippet, you
yank it out, you wrap
it around and you, and
no one knows the better.
So basically as my boss,
Chris Brooks always says that
any problem in computer science
can be solved by one
additional layer of indirection, right?
So they've added their own
indirection. So for the point
of view of asp.net, as
it says here in the,
in the white paper, there
is no code. The snippet
becomes a control that happens
to have a string property
with the code And that's
all you need for that.
Well, yeah. So then they
basically have a, an HTTP
module that lets them get
in early in the, in
the environment and in the,
the cycle as the app
domain gets loaded and they
can get all of their
different modules loaded up ahead
of time. And they have
this custom based class called
script page that basically derives
from the standard page class
and having those base classes,
both a module and for
the base class for all
their pages, gives those pages
a better way to interact
with the life cycle and
make things fit together. The
flow of this show is
going based on this really
create white paper. So I'm
kind of going on the,
on the high level. Yeah.
Got it. I mean, I've
got a few questions probably
as do you go ahead
and I'm not sure you'll
be able to answer them.
But my, my first question
that comes to mind is
how, how does, how does,
how is the rest of
the page life cycle affected
by this? If, if you're
compiling in the parser stage,
does it then get plugged
back into the, it has
to plug back into the
rest of the life cycle.
So does, is there another,
is there another level of
compilation that happens at the
normal compilation time for the
things that aren't dynamic? It's
a good question, but what
they do is this, this
page parser filter. They're the
one that they've replaced. What
it does is it sees
a code snippet and it
replaces the snippet with a
special control. And the control
just holds the code because
in the no compile model,
you're allowed to have markup
and server controls. All right.
So they squirreled away the
code. And then later, later
on when their page becomes
their, their special base class
gets instantiated, they've got a
whole tree of controls that
they can go. And then
themselves dynamically compile using the
iron Python compiler. I see
iron Python techniques scene see
in the code Dom, right?
When you use the code
Dom model, the standard model,
all the user code on
the page shows up inside
of that ultimately generated source
code file. But in this
model, all of the code
is going to be kind
of separate and they're going
to be able to compile
that themselves. There's nothing that
is preventing them from doing
that compilation themselves. Okay. So
the dynamic languages, they've just
basically taken the, the compilation
phase, not the entire page,
but just at the iron
Python portions. And they've moved
it farther along in the,
in the lifecycle. Very cool.
So the part that's a
little confusing. It took me
awhile to get my head
around is that they're using
this no compile feature of
asp.net, but they're simply using
it as a hook to
do, to control the compilation
themselves so that it doesn't
mean that dynamic languages are
being interpreted. It just means
that they're being compiled at
a different time by different
folks, right? Yeah. It's not
the code Dom static compilation.
It's the dynamic code that's
being compiled on the fly
by their, their, their engine.
It's kind of a nice
hack. Yeah. I think it's
pretty clever. They, they, they've
got it working with snippets.
They've got it working with,
with data binding expressions. They're
doing different things to make
doing is called dynamic injection.
So one of the things
that's really cool about dynamic
languages are like, for example,
if you wanted to get
something out of the query
string, right in C sharp,
right now, you would say,
you know, string Fu equals
requests dot query string, and
then angle brat, you know,
bracket, quote, whatever. And you'd
pull that thing out of
the query string, but in
a dynamic language, because it's
being interpreted, it's supposed to
be interpreted later. It's compiled
later. You might just say
request dot Fu, even though
food doesn't really exist as
a property on the request
object. Right. You can interpret
that later. So what they
do is they register the
thing called an injector that
basically says, if you see
something like this in this
form, where in the, in
this example where the request
where this object is a
request object, but there's no
property, you know, basically you're
basically doing, what's called method
missing in Ruby. So if
there's a car object and
I go car.drive, but the
car optic doesn't actually have
a drive method, they just
yank that out and store
it away for later. Exactly.
Add the fee, add the
method. Right? So you can
go and make things like
I'm finding controls and a
tree where you go like
control dot, find control Fu
here. Now in, in something
like a dynamic language, whether
it be iron Python or
something else, you would say,
you know, control dot and
then the name of the
child control. And then the
injector method would automatically inject
the appropriate intent. So what
this means, isn't just, Oh,
gee, we get to express
things as in dynamic languages,
but that we can express
our intent more clearly. Right?
And this is what link
and de-link are all about.
And we'll talk more about
those in another show. So
all of this just adds
up, you know, what does
this mean to you as
a VB programmer and me
as a C sharp programmer.
This just means they're pushing
the envelope and there's language
guys inside of Microsoft. And
this why I brought up
John Lamb is that I have,
I know John personally is
a friend of mine. He
is deeply interested in making
it easier to express your
intent as a programmer to
the computer. That's like what
he believes. And he thinks
that Ruby's like the language
that God would write. If
God could write programming languages
and I can, I can't
help. But think that that
when they move, when they're
doing these kinds of things,
these, whether these, these thought
experiments like this iron Python
for, for asp.net, and then
you get guys like John
moving to Microsoft, that something's
cool is going to happen.
And I think that something's
definitely going to happen, you
know, C sharp three, five,
3.5 or whatever. The next
version is going to be
with link D link with
this. It might take a
while to get the tooling
going on, but something's cool
happening. And it's not going
to be always just see
languages, right. They've been with
us for years, but it's
going to be something else.
It might be 10 years
from now. And it might
be five years. I don't
know. But this white paper,
I really thought was a
harbinger of things to come.
And I would encourage people
to check it out. I
don't know if you'd put
it into production or not,
but it sure is interesting
to think about, well, until
something cool actually does happen.
You can listen to Scott
and I thinking about it
here every week on Hanselman
and Scott. Thanks a lot.
This has been a great
show. Thanks a lot. We'll
talk to you next week
on handsome. .